= SNMP Library for EventMachine

== Summary

This gem extends Ruby-SNMP[http://snmplib.rubyforge.org] to use the asynchronous EventMachine[http://rubyeventmachine.com] library for added performance and scalability. This allows code to scale monitoring applications to access a very high number of devices without the need for complex asynchronous I/O handling.


== Features

The library currently supports:

* SNMP v1 and v2 
* SNMP Get, GetNext, Set, and Walk requests. For SNMPv2 clients, GetBulk and WalkBulk
* Ability to query/set/walk multiple OIDs in parallel.

Future revisions of this library may support:

* Ability to act as an SNMP agent, responding to external queries.

There are no plans to support SNMP v3 or the parsing of MIB files.


== Options

You may set the following options:

  SNMP4EM::Manager.new(
    :version => :SNMPv2c,
    :host => "127.0.0.1",
    :port => 161,
    :community => "public",      # Shorthand for setting both :community_ro and :community_rw
    :community_ro => "public",
    :community_rw => "public",
    :timeout => 1,
    :retries => 3                # Can also be specified as an array of individual timeouts
                                 # For instance, [0.5, 1, 2.5] would send three requests with increasing timeout values
  )

These options may also be passed to an individual query method, for instance:

  snmp = SNMP4EM::Manager.new(...)
  snmp.get(OID, :retries => 2, :timeout => 1)


== Backwards compatibility

Version 1.0.0 tweaks the return values of a few functions. Please test code thoroughly before upgrading to 1.0.0 in production!


== Running tests

This library now includes a full suite of functional tests. They communicate with an SNMP daemon running on the localhost. The library comes with the necessary configuration, but it's much easier to fire up the provided rake task (`rake server`), running in a separate terminal window, before running `rspec`. This works fine on a Mac OS X machine using homebrew (`brew install net-snmp`).


== Acknowledgements

* The SNMP packet processing is handled by the Ruby-SNMP[http://snmplib.rubyforge.org] library, by David Halliday
* EventMachine[http://rubyeventmachine.com], by Francis Cianfrocca and Aman Gupta
* All the helpful folks on the Freenode #eventmachine channel


== Examples

A few definitions:

  OID_SYSTEM = "1.3.6.1.2.1.1"
  OID_SYSNAME = "1.3.6.1.2.1.1.5.0"
  OID_SYSLOCATION = "1.3.6.1.2.1.1.6.0"

A simple SNMP-GET:

  EM.run {
    snmp = SNMP4EM::Manager.new(:host => "192.168.1.1")
  
    request = snmp.get([OID_SYSNAME, OID_SYSLOCATION])
  
    request.callback do |response|
      puts "System name = #{response[OID_SYSNAME]}"
      puts "System location = #{response[OID_SYSLOCATION]}"
    end
  
    request.errback do |error|
      puts "GET got error #{error}"
    end
  }

A simple SNMP-GETNEXT:

  EM.run {
    snmp = SNMP4EM::Manager.new(:host => "192.168.1.1")

    request = snmp.getnext(OID_SYSNAME)

    request.callback do |response|
      r = response[OID_SYSNAME]
      puts "The next OID is #{r[0]}, the next value is #{r[1]}"
    end

    request.errback do |error|
      puts "GETNEXT got error #{error}"
    end
  }

A simple SNMP-SET:

  EM.run {
    snmp = SNMP4EM::Manager.new(:host => "192.168.1.1")

    request = snmp.set({OID_SYSNAME => "My System Name", OID_SYSLOCATION => "My System Location"})

    request.callback do |response|
      if (response[OID_SYSNAME] == true)
        puts "System name set successful"
      else
        puts "System name set unsuccessful: #{response[OID_SYSNAME]}"
      end

      if (response[OID_SYSLOCATION] == true)
        puts "System location set successful"
      else
        puts "System location set unsuccessful: #{response[OID_SYSLOCATION]}"
      end
    end

    request.errback do |error|
      puts "SET got error #{error}"
    end
  }

A simple SNMP-WALK:

  EM.run {
    snmp = SNMP4EM::Manager.new(:host => "192.168.1.1")

    request = snmp.walk(OID_SYSTEM)

    request.callback do |response|
      response[OID_SYSTEM].each do |oid, value|
        puts "#{oid} = #{value}"
      end
    end

    request.errback do |error|
      puts "WALK got error #{error}"
    end
  }

A simple SNMP-BULKWALK:

  EM.run {
    snmp = SNMP4EM::Manager.new(:host => "192.168.1.1")

    request = snmp.bulkwalk(OID_SYSTEM)

    request.callback do |response|
      response[OID_SYSTEM].each do |oid, value|
        puts "#{oid} = #{value}"
      end
    end

    request.errback do |error|
      puts "BULK-WALK got error #{error}"
    end
  }

A simple SNMP-GET-BULK:

  EM.run {
    snmp = SNMP4EM::Manager.new(:host => "192.168.1.1")

    request = snmp.getbulk(OID_SYSTEM)

    request.callback do |response|
      response[OID_SYSTEM].each do |oid, value|
        puts "#{oid} = #{value}"
      end
    end

    request.errback do |error|
      puts "GET-BULK got error #{error}"
    end
  }


== Change Log

Version 1.0.2:

* Ability to specify timeouts as an array of timeout values. Inspired by https://github.com/calmh/node-snmp-native.

Version 1.0.1:

* Requests resulting in an error now return nil unless return_raw is enabled

Version 1.0.0:

* Added SNMPv2 BULKWALK support
* Added ability to receive SNMP traps / informs
* Added functional tests (finally!)
* Moved documentation to Yard
* Lots of code cleanup

Version 0.2.1:

* Code cleanups, speed boosts

Version 0.2.0:

* Added support for SNMPv2, including GET-BULK operations

Version 0.1.0:

* Initial deployment, ability to run get/getnext/set/walk requests in parallel

== Credits

Author: Norman Elton  normelton@gmail.com
